---
title: "On Photography"
date: 2021-11-30T21:53:27-06:00
draft: false
commentable: true
nodate: false
---

I recently finished Susan Sontag's _On Photography_. Here, I include my favorite excerpts from these essays as 
well as some of my favorite photographs I have taken over the years. I 
think about these photos a lot, but Sontag's essays made me think about 
them even more.

> The very activity of taking pictures is soothing, and assuages general 
feelings of disorientation that are likely to be exacerbated by travel. 
Most tourists feel compelled to put the camera between themselves and 
whatever is remarkable that they encounter. Unsure of other responses, 
they take a picture. This gives shape to experience: stop, take a 
photograph, and move on.

{{< figure src="p1.jpg" width="500px" >}}

> The method especially appeals to people handicapped by a ruthless work 
ethic -- Germans, Japanese, and Americans. Using a camera appeases the 
anxiety which the work-driven feel about not working when they are on 
vacation and supposed to be having fun. They have something to do that 
is like a friendly imitation of work: they can take pictures.

{{< figure src="p10.jpg" width="500px" >}}

> Photographic images are pieces of evidence in an ongoing biography or 
history. And one photograph, unlike one painting, implies that there 
will be others.

{{< figure src="p3.jpg" width="500px" >}}

> Photography, which has so many narcissistic uses, is also a powerful 
instrument for depersonalizing our relation to the world; and the two 
uses are complementary . . . it offers, in one easy, habit-forming 
activity, both participation and alienation in our own lives and those 
of others -- allowing us to participate, while confirming alienation.

{{< figure src="p4.jpg" width="500px" >}}

> A capitalist society requires a culture based on images. It needs to 
furnish vast amounts of entertainment in order to stimulate buying and 
anesthetise the injuries of class, race, and sex. And it needs to gather 
unlimited amounts of information, the better to exploit natural 
resources, increase productivity, keep order, make war, give jobs to 
bureaucrats. The camera's twin capacities, to subjectivise reality and 
to objectify it, ideally serve these needs as strengthen them. Cameras 
define reality in the two ways essential to the workings of an advanced 
industrial society: as a spectacle (for masses) and as an object of 
surveillance (for rulers). The production of images also furnishes a 
ruling ideology. Social change is replaced by a change in images. The 
freedom to consume a plurality of images and goods is equated with 
freedom itself. The narrowing of free political choice to free economic 
consumption requires the unlimited production and consumption of 
images.

{{< figure src="p5.jpeg" width="500px" >}}

> The possession of a camera can inspire something akin to lust. And like 
all credible forms of lust, it cannot be satisfied: first, because the 
possibilities of photography are infinite; and, second, because the 
project is finally self-devouring. The attempts by photographers to 
bolster up a depleted sense of reality contribute to the depletion. Our 
oppressive sense of the transience of everything is more acute since 
cameras gave us the means to "fix" the fleeting moment. We consume 
images at an ever faster rate and, as Balzac suspected cameras used up 
laters of the body, images consume reality. Cameras are the antidote and 
the disease, a means of appropriating reality and a means of making it 
obsolete.

{{< figure src="p6.jpg" width="500px" >}}

> But the very question of whether photography is or is not an art is 
essentially a misleading one. Although photography generates works that 
can be called art --it requires subjectivity, it can lie, it gives 
aesthetic pleasure-- photography is not, to begin with, an art form at 
all. Like language, it is a medium in which works of art (among other 
things) are made. Out of language, one can make scientific discourse, 
bureaucratic memoranda, love letters, grocery lists, and Balzac's Paris. 
Out of photography, one can make passport pictures, weather photographs, 
pornographic pictures, X-rays, wedding pictures, and Atget's Paris. 
Photography is not an art like, say, painting and poetry. Although the 
activities of some photographers conform to the traditional notion of a 
fine art, the activity of exceptionally talented individuals producing 
discrete objects that have value in themselves, from the beginning 
photography has also lent itself to that notion of art which says that 
art is obsolete. The power of photography --and its centrality in 
present aesthetic concerns-- is that it confirms both ideas of art. But 
the way in which photography renders art obsolete is, in the long run, 
stronger.

{{< figure src="p7.jpg" width="500px" >}}

{{< figure src="p8.jpg" width="500px" >}}

> A photograph is both a pseudo-presence and a token of absence. Like a 
wood fire in a room, photographs—especially those of people, of distant 
landscapes and faraway cities, of the vanished past—are incitements to 
reverie. The sense of the unattainable that can be evoked by photographs 
feeds directly into the erotic feelings of those for whom desirability 
is enhanced by distance.

{{< figure src="p9.jpg" width="500px" >}}
