---
title: "Thoughts on Between Past and Future"
date: 2021-08-07T17:00:51-05:00
draft: false
commentable: true
nodate: false
---
Science and culture: what's happening?

Science has polarized Americans for years but now more than ever.

Even though effective COVID-19 vaccines have been widely available to 
healthy American adults for months, many refuse the protection and vow 
to never succumb to Bill Gates's "microchip." My current state, 
Missouri, ranks as a COVID hot-spot. Some Missourians have dressed in 
disguise and begged doctors to not publicly reveal they've been 
vaccinated against the virus.

Anti-vaxxers are not a new phenomenon. I do not like to make 
generalizations, so I will acknowledge that not every anti-vaxxer is 
necessarily anti-science. However, they are a good paradigm for the 
relationship between science and the general public.

Earlier this year I read a book called *Why Trust Science?* by Naomi 
Oreskes. The author argues that scientists should earn trust much like 
plumbers or electricians, whom we pay to perform tasks we do not 
necessarily understand even if we wanted. Yet we still pay them to do 
their job. We trust them to do their job effectively; we "believe" in 
them, especially if a friend or online reviewer recommended an 
especially good plumber.

Oreskes identifies a couple reasons why the general public struggles to 
trust science, even though science envelopes our everyday lives via 
smartphones, toasters, and the like: the general population's economic 
interests and science's seeming lack of morals.

It's been several months since I read her book, so I may be a bit rusty, 
but I did recently finish Hannah Arendt's *Between Past and Future*. 
Arendt's concluding essay, "The Conquest of Space and the Stature of 
Man," encouraged me to revisit the relationship between science and the 
general population.

Arendt raises several questions that make no sense to the scientist but 
rather concern the layman and the humanist: what is the nature of man 
and what should be his stature? What is the goal of science and why does 
man pursue knowledge? What is life and what distinguishes human from 
animal life?

The layman and the humanist supervise the scientist; they judge what the 
scientist does because it concerns all mankind. Any answers to these 
questions, however, are non-scientific, though not necessarily 
anti-scientific, because they are never true or false. The problem is 
that terms like "man," "science," and "knowledge" are pre-scientific -- 
almost archaic at this point considering how rapidly science advances in 
the current era.

It is easy for non-scientists to claim that we all now live in a world 
where common sense and reality are no longer compatible. If this were 
true, then scientists would be among the powerful "few" who rule the 
"many" -- those clouded by ignorance and anxiety. After all, scientists 
communicate in an almost different language at work. Society lacks 
quality science writers to bridge the gap.

But this is not true. Scientists still spend a large chunk of their 
lives in the same "common sense" world, speaking the same everyday 
language as laymen. Many climate change researchers drive cars and use 
plastic because they are convenient. Some evolutionary biologists are 
devout Christians. Their work does not disclose this information.

Here is where I feel Oreskes and Arendt converge: the "problem" with 
science is that its results are so objective that laymen feel humanity 
and science are incompatible. Oreskes acknowledges that scientists 
seldom use pronouns such as "I" or "we" in scientific writings, relying 
instead on the passive voice. This is nothing new; in fact, young 
science students are taught to present their work in this way. Sometimes 
we encounter sentences like "we did X," but these pronouns are never 
introduced to present moral arguments.

That makes people uncomfortable. On the surface this not crazy given not 
too distant scientific history: men of the twentieth century split atoms 
without hesitation despite potential havoc. Today, we are told that 
computers perform operations which the human brain cannot comprehend, 
even though humans developed these machines. People like morals, even if 
others do not share their own, as they indicate "human" rather than 
"machine."

Man now achieves things which cannot be expressed in everyday human 
language. Consider the COVID-19 vaccine's mRNA-based technology. Search 
for "covid 19 mrna" to find a plethora of articles, many aimed toward 
the layman rather than the bioengineer, explaining how these vaccines 
work. Sounds good in theory, but when people divorce themselves from 
science entirely, refusing to even consider something "foreign," these 
attempts are futile. Instead they seek comfort in defending their 
apparently threatened human rights in the wake of a "plandemic" because 
to do otherwise would surrender their own humanity, much like scientists 
have already done. Or so it seems.

Although I appreciate Arendt pointing out that many scientists are not 
so different from laymen as it seems, she, too, fears a world 
manufactured entirely by science: "All our pride in what we can do will 
disappear into some kind of mutation of the human race . . . under these 
circumstances, speech and everyday language would indeed be no longer a 
meaningful utterance that transcends behavior even if it only expresses 
it, and it would be much better replaced by the extreme and the in 
itself meaningless formalism of mathematical signs."

I don't think these concerns are unfounded. Even as a PhD candidate in a 
STEM field, I fear a world where everything is optimized, 
"black-and-white," or manufactured. The humanities enrich my free time. 
Writing posts like these scratches that itch for something more than 
science 24/7.

Now I turn to another essay from Between Past and Future called "The 
Crisis in Culture."

A philistine judges everything in terms of material interests, which I 
liken to Marx's term "use value." This person finds little to no use in 
artistic and cultural objects or occupations. That is not to say that 
the philistine is uneducated or that art's utility can or should not be 
exploited. We can listen to music from the twenties to better understand 
what life was like in that era. We can determine how well our favorite 
painting at the local museum fits into a specific artistic movement or 
historical period. There is nothing inherently wrong with these notions 
so long as "one remains aware that these usages, legitimate or not, do 
not constitute the proper intercourse with art."

The problem is not necessarily that no one reads the classics anymore 
but rather that only an "ulterior motive of self-perfection" prompts the 
educated philistine to engage with art. Cultural objects like books, 
paintings, music, and building were made to outlast us. These objects 
lose immortality when seized as currency, to buy a higher self-esteem or 
social status. Arendt traces this behavior back to the European middle 
class's battles with the aristocracy, as culture became the best weapon 
to advance socially.

I genuinely believe many people read Dostoyevsky because his novels are 
timeless -- not because they want to show off to their peers. I like to 
think I am one of those people. But I do think we can find more than one 
"educated philistine" today. For example, visit your local bookstore, 
where you're bound to find heaps of books on stoicism that dip into 
self-help territory. I do not want to critique stoicism or its 
followers; after all, we can pluck great lessons from its primary texts 
to apply to our own lives. However, I do wonder about Silicon Valley and 
Wall Street giants who tout stoicism as some cure-all, harvesting Marcus 
Aurelius and Seneca's maxims for use value. I highly recommend [Ada Palmer’s take on this topic.](https://www.exurbe.com/stoicisms-appeal-to-the-rich-and-powerful/)

Funnily enough, mass society, or those who seek entertainment rather 
than culture, threatens culture less than philistinism. At first I was 
skeptical, but now Arendt's perspective makes more sense. Book lovers can write off television shows and YouTube 
videos as "unworldly," but why critique the entertainment industry for 
producing non-durable consumer goods, when a café also makes non-durable 
goods? They were never meant to withstand the test of time. Art can 
flourish alongside these things. In fact, we need both. I love this 
quotation:

". . . as far as artistic productivity is concerned, it should not be 
more difficult to withstand the massive temptations of mass culture, or 
to keep from being thrown out of gear by the noise and humbug of mass 
society, than it was to avoid the more sophisticated temptations and the 
more insidious noises of the cultural snobs in refined society."

It seems the arts and consumerism could live in harmony, balancing each 
other out. Unfortunately, the problem is that now mass society *is* 
consumers' society, which dedicates leisure time to more and more 
consumption and entertainment and less longing for self-improvement. A 
consumers' society does not know how to care for cultural objects.

I don't think Arendt contradicts herself here but rather identifies two 
camps: those who exploit art for selfish gain, and those who want 
nothing to do with it. The former endangers culture itself, and the 
latter endangers the world more broadly. Neither is good.
