---
title: "My new passport"
date: 2021-12-30T16:32:26-06:00
draft: false
commentable: true
nodate: false
---
Not sorry for today's angsty post; writing helps. 

Every year my opinion on adoption becomes more nuanced in both a general 
and personal sense. The time feels right to touch on the latter, as the 
former warrants a separate blog post, and this time of year always 
reminds me what I have lost. 2021 is no different. However, I did gain 
something this year: my new Russian passport.

A few months ago I described my passport appointment at the Russian 
consulate in Washington D.C. I am pleased to write that I have not been 
able to take my eyes off of this new passport since it arrived a couple 
days ago. What a nice Christmas gift, sort of from myself. Part of me 
still cannot believe I successfully went there all by myself and 
prevailed. My heart skipped a beat when I came home on Tuesday and found 
the same USPS priority mail envelope I had given to the employee who 
patiently tolerated my poor Russian only months ago. I still admire a 
new detail every time I flip through the passport.

{{< figure src="russianpassport.jpg" width="400px" >}}

So, now I have three passports as shown here in the order I received 
them:

{{< figure src="passports.jpeg" width="400px" >}}

As exciting as the prospect may be, this new passport represents more 
than a gateway to my birth country. For me it is a sense of control. I 
still have identity issues and don't feel like I belong in either 
country, but now I hold the reins.

It all started in early 2020 when I started learning Russian and started 
the process to confirm my Russian citizenship. I previously wrote about 
my struggles with chance -- how I feel plucked from one country and 
thrown into another. Why was I chosen to be in my current position and 
not someone else? Why did I lose my birth culture and language? I had no 
say. But now I do.

My USSR passport expired almost twenty years ago, but I did not renew it 
when I was much younger because I know my adoptive parents would have 
never been able to help me. They would have scowled at even the idea of 
this. This is one reason why I still harbor so much resentment. All of 
these parts of me were so apparent yet locked away, the key never 
mentioned.

I hate that I was supposed to pretend that I fit in with my mother's 
Italian family just because I was white like them, my background purged 
as if it did not matter. I hate that my mom scorned my attempts to find 
biological family members. I hate that I felt so uncomfortable as a 
child discussing my adoption that I can count the number of times on one 
hand that I decided to open up, which I almost always regretted.

Do I support adoption? No. Am I glad I ended up with my life? Yes. How 
do I reconcile these feelings? Should I?

I have a lot going for me in life. I feel that I benefit other peoples' 
lives in some ways; I might like to have myself as a friend. But I 
confess that I am not sure I would choose myself to live my life. Aside 
from my poor sense of belonging, adoption has fucked me up in a couple 
ways, gifting me issues with self-worth and abandonment that I often 
conceal with cold rationality. I often feel like things happen to me, 
even if much of my recent life events suggest otherwise. I know it is 
not a good way to live like this.

My parents divorced in early 2020 after I caught my mom cheating on my 
dad with a Twitter fling. Truth be told, their marriage and my 
relationships with my parents, namely my mom, were far from happy for 
years before that. I only recently realized that our family dynamic was 
not normal in the slightest. I sometimes wonder if it is I who uprooted 
their lives again, as if this were a second rejection, the first one 
coming from my biological parents. I more or less cut contact with my 
mom shortly after the fiasco, and this is the first time she has not 
even bothered trying to wish me a happy holidays. It is the right thing 
for my mental health, as I am too angry to even try making peace with 
her.

I realized last year that if no one will feel like a parent to me, then 
I have to be my own. And that is how this whole process -- learning the 
language, getting the passport, and eventually taking the trip back to 
Russia -- feels. I am reparenting myself. It is helping me turn the 
dreaded pain I usually feel around this time of year, Christmas and my 
birthday, into something more positive and in my control. I feel like 
less of a Russian "imposter" and readier than ever to explore something 
so foreign yet so close to me, despite the shaky relations between the 
two countries playing tug-of-war with my sense of self.

For now I am admiring my passport, still improving my Russian, and, 
importantly, waiting for the pandemic to (ever) subside before I think 
about visiting Russia. No problem, as I have already waited long enough 
to start reconnecting. What's another year?

Immensely grateful to the woman who helped me get my new Russian 
passport. I thanked her, and she wrote me the sweetest message in 
return:

> Congratulations darling! Be safe and start dreaming of the new year and 
new adventures sometime soon in Russia! If you need anything let me 
know. My husband and I will always be happy to support you and encourage 
you to continue with what you want and learning and growing and 
experiencing life as you want to and not as some other may dictate. 
Happy New Years! Dream big!
